abbreviations and acronyms:
PSA: prostate-specific antigen
PCa: prostate cancer
BX: biopsy
RC: reclassification
RRP: surgical removal of prostate (radical retropubic prostatectomy)
PT: patient
DX: diagnosis

PT data-
1 record per patient
id: pt-specific unique identifier, assigned for data generation
age.dx: age at PCa diagnosis
sec.time.dx: “secular time”, calendar date of diagnosis. 0 is January 1, 2005.
eta.true: latent state, either 0 or 1, corresponding to indolent (Gleason <=6) or aggressive (Gleason >=7) cancer (respectively); generated for all patients for data simulation but only observed on a subset with surgery (rap)
obs.eta: eta.true is rrp=1, NA otherwise
rrp: does this subject ever have surgery?
rc: does this subject ever reclassify, i.e. have a biopsy with a Gleason score 7 or higher
std.vol: prostate volume, mean and sd standardized
subj: pt-specific unique identifier, assigned after data simulation to correspond to data sorting. data sorted based on obs.eta as follows: eta observed and =0, eta observed and =1, eta unobserved. (sorting by obs.eta makes posterior sampling in JAGS much easier)

PSA data-
1 record per person per PSA observation
psa: outcome measured in continuous time. Measurements may occur before initial PCa diagnosis. 
log.psa: log-transformed PSA used for regression
age: age at PSA measurement
age.std: mean and std dev-standardized age at psa (standardized within this dataset); used in X
std.vol: prostate volume, standardized within psa dataset; used in Z


BX Data-
1 record per annual interval where pt eligible for biopsy or (after rc) surgery.
Patients eligible for BX until RC (as per active surveillance protocol); it is only possible to reclassify once.
Patients eligible for surgery prior to RC or up to 2 years after RC
Patients censored after surgery, 2 years post-RC, or 10 years
No record for initial diagnostic bx 


eta: true state (for all patients, used to generate data)
bx.here: biopsy occurs in this interval; NA after a pt reclassifies
rc: grade reclassification occurs at this annual biopsy
rrp: surgery performed in this annual interval

time, time.ns: years since dx for bx, natural spline representation of years since dx
age, age.std, age.ns: age at bx, standardized, and ns representation
sec.time, sec.time.std: calendar time, standardized (see above)
num.prev.bx: number of prior bx at beginning of interval (used to predict P(BX) in this interval); everyone has one prior bx (diagnostic) at time=1 (
num.prev.bx.rrp: number of prior bx + bx in this interval (used to predict P(RRP) in this interval)
prev.G7: bx grade of Gleason 7 or higher (i.e. reclassification) in this interval or previous intervals (used to predict P(RRP) in this interval)

rm: indicator for removing a record from dataset (used in data generation); not used in analysis


